 
 
Single Pole -To-Earth Fault Detection and L ocation on  the Tehran 
Railway System  Using ICA and PSO  Trained Neural Network   
 
Masoud Safari shaal ,  
Amirkabir  University  Technology, Tehran , Iran 
masoud.safarishaal66@ gmail.com ,  
 
Abstract: In a railroad feeding system, detecting a location of pole to earth faults is important for 
safe operation of the system. The goal  of this paper is to use a combination of the evolutionary  
algorithm and neural networks to increase the accuracy of single pole -to-earth fault detection and 
location on Tehran railroad power supply system. Accordingly, Imperialist Competitive Algorithm 
(ICA) and Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) are used to trai n the neural network for enhancing 
learning process accuracy  and the convergence . Owing to the nonlinearity of system, the fault 
detection is an ideal application for the proposed method where 600 Hz harmonic ripple method 
is used in this paper for fa ult detection. The substations were simulated by considering various 
situations in feeding the circuit, the transformer and the silicon rectifier has been developed by 
typical Tehran metro parameters. Required data for the network learning the process have  been 
gathered from simulation results. 600Hz components value will change with the change of the 
location of single pole to earth fault. Therefore, 600Hz components are used as inputs of the neural 
network when fault location is the output of the network system. The simulation results show  that 
the fault location can be accurately predicted in proposed methods.  
 
Keyword:  Single pole-to-pole fault, Tehran Railway, ICA, PSO, Artificial Neural Network.  
1. INTRODUCTION  
Nowadays, Transports on rail are increasing and major railroad infrastructure investments are 
expected. In a railroad feeding system,  detecting a locati on of pole -earth faults is important for 
safe operation of the system. There are various types of fault sin railroad power traction sy stems, 
such as pole to pole ( PP) faults, single pole to earth (PE) fault and pole to earth to pole (PEP) fault. 
Between these, PE maybe is not as much as other dangerous but detection and location of it can 
enable early preventive measures before the faul ts escalate into more dangerous poles to pole earth 
faults [1].  the fault current may be less than a normal train load, also many factors such as changing 
in train position, track nonlinear impedance, nonlinear s ource voltage of the substation rectifier 
and etc , so these faults are difficult to detect . makes it difficult to get the fault location simply by 
calculations. Owing to the nonlinearity of the system, the fault detections, an ideal application for 
the proposed method where the 600 Hz harmonic ri pple method is used in this paper for fault 
detection [2]. To deal with these nonlinear situations, in this paper two modern neural network -
based  methods are explored. Todays,  the idea of combining ANNs  and evolutionary algorithms 
has received a lot of  attention [3 -8]. ICA is inspired by the historical pattern of competition among 
the countries of imperialism . In fact, this algorithm is an open door to the world of mathematics 
with a completely human perspective . The algorithm initially starts from several  countries ; In fact, 
these countries are possible answers to the algorithm . [9-11, 15-16]. Also , Particle Swarm 
Optimization (PSO) is a possible optimization . An evolutionary and simulated algorithm that is 
inferred from the behavior of humans and animals . A special feature of  this algorithm (PSO) is 
that it executes real numbers directly in a continuous space and also, unlike other algorithms, does 
not guarantee the existence of a definite answer . PSO requires a small number of parameters to be 
set, which is easy to implement and has certain memory characteristics . [12], which have been 
inspired by nature  and implemented in the differe nt optimization problem [13] . In this paper, th e 
simulation system is a typical simulation of the Tehran railway system. In fact, the electrical 
characteristics by simulation are similar to the basic characteristics of the actual system.  600Hz 
components v alue will change with the change of the locat ion of single pole to earth fault. 
Therefore, 600Hz components are used as inputs of a neural network when fault location is the 
output of the network system. After this introductory section 1, the rest of this paper is organized 
as follows: In section 2, modeling of the railroad, components are presented. In section 3,600Hh 
components are described. Neural networks trained by evolutionary algorithms which have  been 
used in this paper, are presented in section 4.  Also, i n section 5, simulation results are given an d 
discussed. These results demonstrate the validity of the method. Also, in this section the 
performance of the ICA algorithm  is compa red with the p erformance of the PSO  and conventional 
neural network method. Finally, in section 6  the conclusions are presented . 
 
2. MODELING OF RAILWAY  COMPONENT  
2.1 Feeding  System  
The electric power generated by the power station is carried to electric railroad substations by 
transmission line. Traction power suppl y is one of the most important parts of the tr ansporting 
structure. The scheme used in Tehran railroad electrification systems is to supply traction systems 
directly using the fundamental frequency main power, ie, 60 Hz [1 4]. The transmission or sub -
transm ission voltages are then directly transformed by a power transformer (63k/20k) to rectifier 
voltage. The output voltage of the rectifier to the traction voltage is 750v  [14].  
 
2.2 12-Pulse  Rectifier : 
Electric power must  be converted by power converters so that it can flow between the public grid 
and the  railroad grid. Because a three -phase power supply is used in Tehran Railway,  a rectifier 
must be used to provide the required direct current.  A 12 -pulse system which is two sets of6 -pulse 
rectifier used in order to reduce the harmonics.  In fact, this rectifier  gives  unregulated  voltage.  
This voltage contains AC component of 600Hz and its harmonics.  [2], in this paper this component 
used for fault detection.  
 
2.3 Transformer  
There are a supply transformer for each rectifier which provides the medium  voltage for them 
needed  based on its load. Therefore , transformer have two secondary windings, connected in the 
delta and the star at 600 Vac.  The transformer is modeled simply with leakage reactance and 
winding resistance. Also, in T ehran's electrified railroad traction power supply system, the vector 
group is Yy0d1 [1 4]. The  circuit of Fig.1 shows a parallel connected 12 -pulse rectifier and its 
supply transformer.  
 
 
Fig.1. Tarsnsformer and  12 pulse rectifire  
 
2.4 Tracti on  
Traction system  plays a very important role in railroad installations. Today, elec tric traction 
systems have been developed for both DC and AC power supply in railways . In Tehran railroad a 
NO.ZQ -132 DC motor is used as traction in this work the parameters of this motor have been used 
for simulation [1 4]. 
 
2.5 Total  model  
Fig.2 shows the total model of rai lroad system, as shown in it, bleed resistors of 100 and 200 Ohm 
are used both to define normal voltage with respect to earth, this resistor used to set the positive 
and negative rail normal voltage. X is the di stance between the substation and fault locat ion, also 
train location is assumed to be constant, in any simulation the value of X has been changed and 
the 600 Hz voltage amplitude is determined from this simulation result. R1 is the fault resistance 
that a ssumed to be 100 Ohm [1].  

 
Fig.2. Total mode l of fault an d railway  
 
3. 600H Z COMPONENTS CIRCUIT  
By using this circuit Vp, Vn, Ip and In can  be measured. Accordingly, when other parameters such 
as train location Lt, train impedanc Zt and rail impedance Zrl ar e known the fault location can by 
calculated  as following equation  [1]. 
 
( ) ( ) 2
()p d p n d n t n t rl n
f
rl p nR I I R I I Z I L Z ILZ I I    
 
  
 
(1) 
2
()p n t n t rl n
rl p nV V Z I L Z I
Z I I  
  
  
                (2) 
However, the equations are different when Lt<Lf . Obtain ing of the fault location  by calculations , 
is hard because of  many factors such as changing in train po sition, track nonlinear impedance, 
nonlinear source voltage of the substation rectifier etc[1] . To deal with these nonlinear situations, 
in th is paper two modern neural network -based  method are explored. Fig. 3 shows 600Hz 
component circuit with train position beyod the fault location  [1]. 

 
Fig.3. 600Hz C omponent circuit with train position beyod the fault location.  
 
4. NEURAL NETWORK TRAINED BY EVOLUTIONARY ALGORITHMS  
Using traditional neural network design methods is no t very accurate. In this paper , we intend to 
present a different method. In this method, we first use the ICA and PSO  to train neural networks, 
then trained neural networks are used t o find the location  of the fault . 
 
4.1 Imperialist  Competitive A lgorithm  
The Imperialist Competitive Algorithm (ICA) is one of the newest evolutionary optimization 
algorithms. This algorithm, as its name implies, is based on modeling the socio -political process 
of the colonial phenomenon. Therefore, it is a new algorithm and can compete with other 
evolutionary algorithms such as genetic algorithms  and ant colony algorithms, etc. In terms of 
applicati on, it has been used to solve many problems in the field of optimization, including in 
electrical engineering, computer, industry, mechanics, economics, management, etc. The reason 
for the high popularity of this algorithm, along with its high efficiency, is mostly due to its 
innovative, new and attractive aspect for optimiza tion experts . Fig. 4 shows the flowchart of the 
ICA. In this pape r, a population of 30 countries consisting of 3 empires  and 27 colonies are used . 
 

Start
 Revolve some 
coloniesAssimilate coloniesInitialize empires
Is there a colony in an empire which 
has lower cost than of the imperialistImperialistic Competition
Compute the total 
cost of all empires
Exchange the position of 
that imperialist and colonyIs there an empire 
with no colonies
Eliminate this empire
Unite Similar Empires
Stop condition 
satisfied
ENDYes
NoYes
YesNo
No 
Fig.4. Flowchart of the Imperialist Competitive Algorithm  
 
4.2  Particle S warm Optimization  
The idea of the Particle Swarm Optimization algorithm was first proposed by Kennedy and 
Eberhart  [12]. PSO is a nature -inspired, iterative evolutionary computational algorithm. The 
source of inspiration for this algori thm is the social behavior of animals, such as the collective 
movement of birds and fish. As the name implies, it is a particle -based optimization method. The 
basis for the development of the PSO algorithm is that the possible solutions to an optimization 
problem are considered as birds without volume and qualitative properties, which are referred to 
as particles, these birds fly in an n -dimensional space and their path in space . They change the 
search based on their past experiences and those of their neigh bors. The PSO algorithm has a 
simple structure and at the same time has acceptable performance. Therefore, due to the capability 
of the PSO algorithm in finding the optimal global solution with a very high probability and high 
convergence rate, this algori thm has been used to train neural networks . Fig. 5  shows the flowchart 
of the PSO.  In this case of study, 200  particles and 400 iterations were employed.  
 
InitializeSwrm
Calculate Velocities
Calculate New Positions 
Evaluate Swarm 
Update memory of each particle
Optimal or good solution found?
Stop: giving gBest, optimai solution.YesNo 
Fig.5. Flow chart for Particle Swarm optimization  
 
5. RESULTS  
In this sectio n two proposed estimator systems, compared with conventional feed forward neural 
network and with each other Fig. 6 (a) and (b) show ICA trained NN output vs. real output for 
train data and test data respectively, also Fig. 7 (a) and (b) sho w PSO trained n eural network output 
vs. real output for training and test data. Accordingly, Fig. 8 (a) and (b) show output vs. real output 
for training and test data. In these figures the correlation of real output with proposed method 
output is displayed . In addition t o correlation rate, in order to compare the accuracy of proposed 
methods, it is very important to select a reasonable metric to evaluate the results. Hence, the 
following Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) and Root Mean Square Error (RMSE ) are 
used here  for after -the-fact error analysis:  
11*100Ntf
i txx
Nx


 (6) 
2
11N
tf
ixxN  (7) 
Where Xt is the actual load and Xf is the forecasted data. MAPE is a percentage of error while 
RMSE is a number indicating the model bias.  MAPE, RMSE correl ation value for all mentioned 
method measured for training and testing data as shown in Table. I.  As the results show, accuracy 
of the model performance was acceptable in both proposed methods, although ICA NN's results 
were slightly more ac curate.   
 
Fig.6. ICA trained Neural Network output vs. real output for a) train data b) test data  
 
 

 
Fig.7 . PSO trained Neural Network output vs. real output for a) train data b) test data  
 
 
Fig.8 . Feed Forward Neural Network output vs. real output for a) train data b ) test data  
 
 

Table. I . Comparison of proposed method  with conventional  Neural Network  
  Training data   Testing Data  
 MAPE  RMSE  Correlation  MAPE  RMSE  Correlation  
ICA trained NN  0.0061  0.031  0.9885  0.0055  0.026  0.9927  
PSO trained NN  0.0060  0.042  0.9840  
 0.0067  0.038  0.9883  
Neural Network  0.0099  0.089  0.9679  0.0108  0.085  0.9718  
 
 
6. CONCLUSION  
A typical simulation of the Tehran railroad system is developed in MATLAB environment. Single 
pole to earth fault detection using 600Hz ripple componen ts by three neu ral networks models, 
namely ICA trained neural network, PSO trained neural network and conventional feed forward 
neural network are presented. The result shows that detection can be improved by combination of 
the mentioned evolutionary algor ithm by neural network. Also, the ICA trained the neural network 
to give a better result than other methods.  
REFERENCE  
[1] R. Atkins ,  J. Allan . C.J. Goodman.   K. Payne . “Single pole -to-earth fault detection and location on 
a fourth -rail DC railway syste m”. Electric Power Applications, IEE Proceedings . Vol. 15,No. 4, 
2004,  477-486. 
[2]  J. Arrillaga, “Power System Harmonics ”. Wiley,  1985.  
[3] M.Sarvi, M.Safari, “Fuzzy, ANFIS and ICA trained neural network modelling of Ni -Cd batteries 
using experimental data” - Journal of World Applied Programming ., V.8  (2013). p.93 -100 
[4] P. Tang, Z. Xi. “The Research on BP Neural Network Model Based on Guara nteed Convergen ce 
Particle Swarm Optimization ”. Second  International Symposium on Intelligent Information 
Technol ogy Application,  Vol. 2, Dec 2008 , pp. 13-16. 
[5] M.Safari, M.Sarvi, “Optimal load sharing strategy for a wind/diesel/battery hybrid power system 
based on imperialist competitive neural network algorithm” - IET Renewable Power Generation , 
V.8 (2014) p..  739 – 749  
[6] S Nazari -Shirkouhi,  H. Eivazy, R. Ghodsi, K. Rezaie,  E. Atashpaz -Gargari, “Solving the Integrated 
Product M ix-Outsourcing Problem by a Novel Meta -Heuristic Algorithm: Imperialist Competitive 
Algorithm ”. Expert Systems with Applications , Vol. 37, No. 12 2010, pp. 7615 –26. 
[7]  M.Safari, M.Sarvi, “Estimation the Performance of a PEM Fuel Cell System a t Different Operating 
Conditions using Neuro Fuzzy (ANFIS) -TI Journals” - World Applied Programming,  V.3 (2013) 
p.355 -360.   
[8] E. Atashpaz -Gargari,  F. Hashemzadeh , R. Rajabioun, C. Lucas, “ Colonial Competitive Algorithm, 
a novel approach for PID controller design in MIMO di stillation colu mn process ”, International 
Journal of Intelligent Computing and Cybernetics , Vol.1,  2008, pp.  337–55.  
[9] M. Yousefi , N.  Darus , H. Mohammadi. “An imperialist competitive algorithm  for optimal design 
of plate -fin heat  exchangers ”. International  Journal of Hea t and Mass Transfer . Vol. 55, No. 11, 
May 2012,pp.  3178 -85. 
[10] A. Kaveh , S. Talatahari. “Optimum design of skeletal structures using imperialist competitive  
algorithm ”. Computers & Structures , Vol. 88,No.21 2010, pp. 1220 –9. 
[11] H. Moradi , M. Zandieh . “An imperiali st competitive algorithm for a mixed -model assembly line  
sequencing  problem ”. Journal of Manufacturing Systems . Vol. 32 , No.1  2013 , pp. 46–54. 
[12] J. Kennedy and R.C. Eberhart, Particle Swarm Optimization, Proceedings of the IEEE 
International Conference on N eural Networks , Vol.4, 1995, pp. 1942 -1948 . 
[13] Khazeiynasab, S. R., & Qi, J. (2021). Generator Parameter Calibration by Adaptive Approximate 
Bayesian Computation with Sequential Monte Carlo Sampler.  IEEE Transactions on Smart Gri d.  
[14] http://tehran -metro.com/  
[15] M.Safari, M.Sarvi “New Hybrid Maximum Power Point Tracking Methods for Fuel Cell using 
Artificial Intelligent”  2021  
[16] M.Saf ari, M.Sarvi, “A Fuzzy Model for Ni -Cd Batteries” International Journal of Artificial 
Intelligence, V.2 (2013).p.81 -89 
 
